# Notes on _Backstepping control of H-L confinement transition in fusion plasma model_
## Chapter 2: Physics of the confinement transition and H-mode
### 2.1 Order of scales

+ Transport of magnetic flux is the slowest process within a tokamak plasma; therefore, the magnetic field can be treated as a constant background field during transition.

+ Magnetic reconnection (_e.g._ sawtooth instability) occurs on a fast time scale, but is not considered for this thesis.

+ Pressure gradients drive the turbulent modes, giving anomalous transport of particles, energy, and momentum.

	+ Changes in turbulence occur in the smallest of time scales; they are often inferred from fluctuations in density and electric field.

### 2.2 Turbulence
#### 2.2.1 Dynamics

+ The dominant modes are the ion temperature gradient mode and trapped electron mode in a collisionless plasma.

+ Micro-instabilities give drift waves because electrons neutralize fluctuations in finite time.

	+ The coupling of drift waves to other plasma modes yields different types of drift-wave turbulences such as the drift resistive ballooning mode and drift Alfvén turbulence.

+ Drift waves are the only type of turbulence able to drive a radial flux and therefore, drift wave turbulence determines the level of edge turbulence and associated transport. Basic model for this:
	$$\frac{\text{d}\mathcal{E}}{\text{d}t} \,=\, \gamma_1 \mathcal{E} - \alpha_{sat}\mathcal{E}^2$$

	+ $\mathcal{E}$ is the turbulence level, $\gamma_1$ is the growth rate, and $\alpha_{sat}$ is the saturation rate._

#### 2.2.2 Flow shear suppression of turbulence

+ A radial shear in plasma flow decorrelates turbulent eddies, which are small compared to the flow length scale. As eddies are extended by the sheared plasma flow, their wave energy is transferred to larger flow structures ad the expense of small turbulent structures:
	$$\frac{\partial V_{\mathbf{E}\times\mathbf{B}}}{\partial x} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(\frac{E_r}{B}\right) \,\approx\, \frac{1}{B_\phi} \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial x}$$

+ Both zonal and mean $\mathbf{E}\times\mathbf{B}$ flow are involved in the transition.

	+ Zonal flows are produced by the shear of Reynolds stress arising from correlated radial and poloidal fluctuations.

		+ Its shear suppresses the drift-wave turbulence, but the mechanism is damped by ion-ion collisions or flow instabilities. Therefore, zonal flows provide a temporary sink of energy, which show their signature before the transition.

	+ The mean flow remains in H-mode, while the zonal flow vanishes. Shear flow suppression of turbulence has been modeled, in which sheared flow amplifies the saturation mechanism in H-mode, which is called the nonlinear suppression model:
		$$\frac{\text{d}\mathcal{E}}{\text{d}t} \,=\, \gamma_1 \mathcal{E} - \alpha_{sat} \left(1 + \alpha_{sup} \left(\frac{\partial Z}{\partial x}\right)\right) \mathcal{E}^2$$

		+ The suppression rate coefficient is $\alpha_{sup}$ and the normalized radial electric field is $Z$. This nonlinear model is more robust compared to the linear one.

### 2.3 Plasma momentum

+ Internal drivers of momentum are the nonambipolar fluxes, while external momentum input is usually NBI.

	+ Viscous stress damps the flow across flux surfaces, but also charge exchange friction with neutrals at the edge adds to damping.

+ Momentum is a conserved variable that can be transported across flux surfaces to add a radial component to the plasma current. In steady-state, the radial ion force balance is:
	$$E_r \,=\, \frac{1}{n_i q_i} \nabla p_i + v_\phi B_\theta - v_\theta B_\phi$$

	+ Often, the radial field is determined experimentally by measure 3 contributions:

		+ The poloidal and toroidal flow velocity can be measured using spectroscopy on radiating impurities assuming it represents the plasma flow velocity.

		+ The pressure gradient can be measured from density and temp measurements, but the error is amplified near the edge due to steep gradients.

	+ Another approach to measure $E_r$ requires the knowledge of the particle fluxes across magnetic flux surfaces. These fluxes can be classified as ambipolar and nonambipolar.

		+ Ambipolar fluxes are equal for electrons and ions, resulting in zero radial current.

		+ Nonambipolar $\Gamma^{na}$ are different for various species and may violate the ambipolarity constraint:
			$$\langle \mathbf{J}\cdot \nabla \rho \rangle \,=\, \sum_s q_s \Gamma_s^{na} \,=\, 0$$

		+ As a result, $E_r$ generates a return current such that the flux surface-averaged divergence of the plasma vanishes.

		+ Nonambipolar fluxes are also generated by kinetic and atomic processes.

### 2.4 Nonambipolar particle fluxes

+ The total nonambipolar particle flux $\Gamma^{na}$ is split into contributions from volumetric $\Gamma_V^{na}$ and edge $\Gamma_E^{na}$ processes.

+ The volumetric components are summed up as:
	$$\Gamma_V^\text{na} \,=\, \underset{\substack{\text{bulk} \\ \text{viscosity}}}{\Gamma^{\pi \parallel}} + \underset{\substack{\text{shear} \\ \text{viscosity}}}{\Gamma^{\pi \perp}} + \underset{\text{polarization}}{\Gamma^\text{pol}} + \underset{\substack{\text{Reynolds} \\ \text{stress}}}{\Gamma^\text{Rey}} + \underset{\substack{\text{Maxwell} \\ \text{stress}}}{\Gamma^\text{Max}} + \underset{\substack{\text{resonant magn.} \\ \text{perturbations}}}{\Gamma^{\mathbf{J}\times\mathbf{B}}} + \underset{\substack{\text{poloidal flux} \\ \text{transient}}}{\Gamma^{\dot{\psi}_p}} + \underset{\text{external}}{\Gamma^\text{S}},$$

	+ $\Gamma^{\pi\parallel, \pi \perp}$ is from viscous torque, $\Gamma^\text{pol}$ is from plasma polarization, $\Gamma^\text{Rey,Max}$ from fluctuation-induced Reynolds and Maxwell stress, $\Gamma^{\mathbf{J}\times\mathbf{B}}$ is non-axisymmetric resonant magnetic perturbations, $\Gamma^{\dot{\psi}_p}$ from momentum transport due to poloidal flux transients, and $\Gamma^\text{S}$ as external momentums sources and sinks._

		+ <span style="color:red">Gyroviscosity (viscosity in the diamagnetic direction)</span> is NOT taken into account, since its particle flux is negligible in a tokamak.

		+ Also Reynolds and Maxwell stress are left out (fluctuation-induced stresses) because they consider average plasma state variables.

		+ The poloidal flux transient is neglected since the magnetic field is assumed quasi-stationary around the transition time.

	+ The effect of NBI (axisymmetric) resonant magnetic perturbations or ERCH may be added to the equation from the external term.

+ At the edge, nonambipolar processes can be active due to the transition of closed to open magnetic field lines, the finite number of coils, or atomic processes due to the presence of neutrals:
	$$\Gamma^\text{na}_E \,=\, \underset{\substack{\text{anomalous} \\ \text{diffusion}}}{\Gamma^\text{an}} + \underset{\substack{\text{orbit} \\ \text{loss}}}{\Gamma^\text{ol}} + \underset{\substack{\text{charge} \\ \text{exchange}}}{\Gamma^\text{cx}} + \underset{\substack{\text{ripple} \\ \text{loss}}}{\Gamma^\text{rl}}$$

	+ $\Gamma^\text{an}$ is from anomalous cross-field diffusion (drift waves), $\Gamma^\text{ol}$ is from direct orbit loss (ion vs. electron Larmor radius), $\Gamma^\text{cx}$ is from charge exchange friction with neutrals, and $\Gamma^\text{rl}$ is from ripple losses due to magnetic field inhomogeneities.

		+ <span style="color:red">Ripple losses</span> are excluded because low collisionality is assumed.

+ This leads to a full expression, excluding the aforementioned fluxes:
	$$\Gamma^\text{na} \,=\, \Gamma^{\pi \parallel} + \Gamma^{\pi \perp} + \Gamma^\text{pol} + \Gamma^\text{an} + \Gamma^\text{ol} + \Gamma^\text{cx}$$

	+ Using the ambipolarity condition, the dynamics of the radial electric field can be derived from this.

### 2.5 L-H transition model
$$\frac{\partial n}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(D(\mathcal{E})\frac{\partial n}{\partial x}\right) \\ \frac{\partial U}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x}\left(\chi(\mathcal{E}) n \frac{\partial T}{\partial x} + \frac{D(\mathcal{E}) T}{\gamma - 1} \frac{\partial n}{\partial x}\right)$$

+ Conservation of mass and energy is above, with particle and heat diffusivities $D(\mathcal{E})$ and $\chi(\mathcal{E})$, respectively, and the ratio of ion-electron heat capacity (adiabatic index) $\gamma$.

	+ The particle and heat diffusivities are simplified due to the belief that different diffusivities do not alter the bif behavior qualitatively. This is the simplification:
		$$\chi \,=\, \frac{D}{\zeta(\gamma - 1)}$$

	+ The additional parameter $\zeta$ adapts the ratio between $\chi$ and $D$. Also, it is assumed that particle diffusivity scales linearly with turbulence $\mathcal{E}$, which includes neoclassical and turbulent transport:
		$$D(\mathcal{E}) \,=\, D_{min} + (D_{max} - D_{min}) \frac{\mathcal{E}}{\mathcal{E}_{max}}$$

		+ $\mathcal{E}_{max} = \gamma_1 \alpha_{sat}^{-1}$ is the max turbulence level.

	+ Plasma energy is rephrased: $U \,=\, \dfrac{n T}{\gamma - 1}$. This simplifies the expression of <span style="color:red">(2.11)</span> which can then be subtracted to give an expression of only plasma temperature:
<!---
		$$n \frac{\partial T}{\partial t} + T \frac{\partial n}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(\frac{D(\mathcal{E}) n}{\zeta} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}\right) + T \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(D\mathcal{E} \frac{\partial n}{\partial x}\right) + D(\mathcal{E}) \frac{\partial n}{\partial x} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}$$
--->
		$$\frac{\partial T}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(\frac{D(\mathcal{E}) n}{\zeta} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}\right) + \left(\frac{\zeta + 1}{\zeta} \frac{D(\mathcal{E})}{n} \frac{\partial n}{\partial x} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}\right)$$

+ The radial electric field PDE has radial currents from polarization and shear viscosity explicitly. The other nonambipolar processes are partly affected by the density and temperature gradients, which couples the differential equations.

	+ $G(Z)$ is a cubic polynomial that approximates the remaining electric field-induces contributions, which has an inflection point in $Z$-space denoted as $Z_S$:
		$$\epsilon \frac{\partial Z}{\partial t} \,=\, \mu \frac{\partial^2 Z}{\partial x^2} + \frac{c_n T}{n^2} \frac{\partial n}{\partial x} + \frac{c_T}{n} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x} + G(Z) ~~~~~~~~ (2.17)$$

	+ $Z$ is the normalized electric field by normalizing $E_r$ with respect to space (ion Larmor radius $\rho_{pi}$) and energy (temperature $T$).
		$$\text{NORMALIZATION:} ~~~~~ Z \,=\, \frac{\rho_{pi} e E_r}{T} ~~~~\text{with}~~~~ \rho_{pi} \,=\, \frac{m_i v_{ti}}{e B_\theta}$$

	+ The PDE of $Z$ is not only nonlinear, but also includes a nonlinear coupling through temperature and density gradients.

	+ The boundary conditions are of the Robin-type at the separatrix for $x = 0$:
		$$\frac{\partial n}{\partial x}\biggr\rvert_{x = 0} = \frac{n}{\lambda_n}, ~~~~~ \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}\biggr\rvert_{x = 0} = \frac{T}{\lambda_T}, ~~~~~ \frac{\partial Z}{\partial x}\biggr\rvert_{x = 0} = \frac{Z}{\lambda_Z}$$

		+ The SOL boundary conditions force the plasma variables to zero along a typical length scale $\lambda$. The Neumann-type boundary conditions at the plasma core are given in terms of the particle and heat fluxes at $x = L$, while the radial electric field shear vanishes:
			$$-\left[D(\mathcal{E}) \frac{\partial n}{\partial x}\right]_{x = L} = \Gamma_c, ~~~~~ -\left[\frac{D(\mathcal{E})}{\zeta} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x}\right]_{x = L} = \left[\frac{(\gamma - 1) q_c - T \Gamma_c}{n}\right]_{x = L}, ~~~~~ \left[\frac{\partial Z}{\partial x}\right]_{x = L} = 0$$

			+ The (negative) fluxes flow towards the SOL, at $x = 0$, for positive gradients that increase towards the plasma core, at $x = L$.

	+ The model shows different transitions (smooth, oscillatory, or sharp) depending on the coefficients $a$, $b$, and $c$ of $G$:
		$$G(Z) \,=\, a + b(Z - Z_S) + c(Z - Z_S)^3$$

### 2.6 Radial electric field
#### 2.6.1 Partial differential equation

+ Ampère's law:
	$$\nabla \times \mathbf{B} \,=\, \mu_0 \mathbf{J} + \mu_0 \epsilon_0 \frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t}$$

	+ The divergence in the radial direction is zero, meaning the plasma and displacement current must vanish. This means we obtain an equation for the radial electric field and radial current:
		$$\epsilon_0 \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial t} \,=\, -J_r \,=\, \sum_k \left(q_{e,i} \Gamma_{e,i}^k\right)$$

		+ $k$ represents some nonambipolar process, with $q\,\Gamma$ as a particular radial current for electrons or ions ($q$ is charge).

	+ We can substitute this into the PDE, with some substitutions found in Appendix A:
		$$\epsilon_0 \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial t} \,=\, \underset{\text{bulk viscosity}}{e \Gamma_i^{\pi \parallel}} + \underset{\text{shear viscosity}}{\frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(\frac{m_i n_i \mu_i}{B_\theta^2} \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial x}\right)} - \underset{\text{polarization}}{\frac{m_i n_i}{B^2} \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial t}} + \underset{\substack{\text{anomalous} \\ \text{diffusion}}}{e \Gamma_e^\text{an}} - \underset{\text{orbit loss}}{e \Gamma_i^\text{ol}} - \underset{\substack{\text{charge} \\ \text{exchange}}}{e \Gamma_i^\text{cx}}$$

	+ Rearrange, and add the polarization current to the displacement current:
		$$\epsilon_0 \left(1 + \frac{m_i n_i}{\epsilon B^2}\right) \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{\partial}{\partial x} \left(\frac{m_i n_i \mu_i}{B_\theta^2} \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial x}\right) + e\left(-\Gamma_i^{\pi \parallel} + \Gamma_e^\text{an} - \Gamma_i^\text{ol} - \Gamma_i^\text{cx}\right)$$

	+ The pre-factor to the time derivative can be written in terms of the Alfvén velocity $v_A$:
		$$\epsilon_0 \left(1 + \frac{m_i n_i}{\epsilon B^2}\right) \,=\, \epsilon_0 \left(1 + \frac{m_i n_i c_0^2 \mu_0}{\epsilon B^2}\right) \,=\, \epsilon_0 \left(1 + \frac{c_0^2}{v_A^2}\right), ~~~~~ v_A \,\approx\, \frac{B}{\sqrt{\mu_0 m_i n_i}}$$

		+ It is also safe to assume that $v_A \ll c_0$ at the plasma edge.

	+ OVERALL, the PDE simplifies (assuming constant viscosity coefficient) to:
		$$m_i n_i \left(\frac{B_\theta}{B}\right)^2 \frac{\partial E_r}{\partial t} \,=\, m_i n_i \mu_i \frac{\partial^2 E_r}{\partial x^2} + e B_\theta^2 \left(-\Gamma_i^{\pi \parallel} + \Gamma_e^\text{an} - \Gamma_i^\text{ol} - \Gamma_i^\text{cx}\right)$$

#### 2.6.2 Normalization

+ After a lengthy process, the model can be normalized:
		$$\frac{m_i n_i T_i}{e \rho_{pi}} \left(\frac{B_\theta}{B}\right)^2 \frac{\partial Z}{\partial t} \,=\, \frac{m_i n_i \mu_i T_i}{e \rho_{pi}} \frac{\partial^2 Z}{\partial x^2} + e B_\theta^2 \left(-\Gamma_i^{\pi \parallel} + \Gamma_e^\text{an} - \Gamma_i^\text{ol} - \Gamma_i^\text{cx}\right)$$

	+ This model assumes the that the effects of $\dfrac{\partial T_i}{\partial x}$ and $\dfrac{\partial^2 T_i}{\partial x^2}$ on the shear viscosity are negligible.

#### 2.6.3 Coupling



#### 2.6.4 Comparison

+ The physics-based (as opposed to the 'model'-based) electric field PDE can be put into the following form:
	$$\hat{\epsilon} \frac{\partial Z}{\partial t} \,=\, \hat{\mu} \frac{\partial^2 Z}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\hat{c}_n T}{n^2} \frac{\partial n}{\partial x} + \frac{\hat{c}_T}{n} \frac{\partial T}{\partial x} + \frac{T g(Z)}{n} ~~~~~~~~~~~ (2.38)$$

	+ The electric field time scale is determined by $\hat{\epsilon}$, while $\hat{\mu}$ determines the layer thickness in which the electric field curvature is significant. These can thus be seen as time and 'length' scales:
		$$\hat{\epsilon} \,=\, \frac{m_i T^2}{e \rho_{pi}} \left(\frac{B_\theta}{B}\right)^2, ~~~~~ \hat{\mu} \,=\, \frac{m_i \mu_i T^2}{e \rho_{pi}}$$

+ The thermodynamic coefficients $\hat{c}_n$ and $\hat{c}_T$ can be expressed in terms of the nonambipolar contributions affected by the density and temperature gradient, respectively <span style="color:red">(2.41)</span>.

### 2.7 Hysteresis

+ Hysteresis is often visualized by a gradient-flux relation, _e.g._ electron pressure gradient versus separatrix heat flux: $\nabla p_e(P_{sep})$._

+ Here, in the model of §2.5, the existence and size of the hysteresis are governed by the parameters $b$ and $c$.

### 2.8 Edge transport barrier
#### 2.8.1 H-mode physics

+ The edge transport barrier is characterized by a pedestal height (maximum edge pressure) and width (radial extent of edge gradient). The pedestal width is considered an additional degree of freedom, determining the time-averaged pedestal pressure.

#### 2.8.2 Control of edge transport barrier



### 2.9 Discussion

+ Assumptions were made, most important being the basis of nonambipolar particle fluxes.

## Chapter 3: Model analysis



## Chapter 4: Boundary control



## Chapter 5: Conclusion and discussion



## Appendix A: Nonambipolar particle fluxes
### A.1 Tokamak and plasma parameters



### A.2 Polarization current



### A.3 Ion (perpendicular) shear viscosity



### A.4 Ion (parallel) bulk viscosity



### A.5 Residual Reynolds stress



### A.6 Electron anomalous diffusion



### A.7 Ion orbit loss



### A.8 Charge exchange friction



### A.9 Ion ripple loss



## Appendix B: Linearization



## Appendix C: Spatial derivatives of eigendecomposition



## Appendix D: Characteristic ODE for the kernel problem



## Appendix E: First-order kernel problem



## Appendix F: Numerical implementation of kernel problem
